good afternoon and welcome to this
number 10 press conference on our
progress in the fight against cough in
my team I'm joined today by Professor
Steve Paris the national medical
director at NHS England in a moment or
two I'll hand over to Steve to take us
through the slide updates from the
Cabinet Office briefing room but first I
want to set out the latest coronavirus
station 1 million at two hundred and six
thousand four hundred and five tests for
coronavirus have now been carried out in
UK including seventy six thousand four
hundred and ninety six yesterday overall
one hundred and eighty six thousand five
hundred and ninety nine people have
tested positive
that's an England of four thousand three
hundred and thirty nine cases since
yesterday fourteen thousand two hundred
and forty eighty people are currently
being treated in hospital for
coronavirus compared to 14 thousand six
hundred and ninety five yet sadly of
those who have tested positive for
coronavirus across all settings twenty
eight thousand four hundred and forty
six have died behind the numbers has
been an increase of three hundred and
fifteen deaths since yesterday across
all settings this pandemic has claimed
more than twenty eight thousand lives
and each one of them is precious each
one valued each one irreplaceable the
pain of bereavement and heartbreak is
deeply personal but as a society we are
showing care and compassion across
boundaries offering support and a chance
to talk through grief together
for those experiencing the first Ramadan
about a loved one this will be a
particularly painful time I send my
sincere condolences to all families who
are grieving as with Christians who
could not celebrate Easter together in
church and the Jewish community whose
Passover rituals were affected by social
distancing our thoughts are with Muslim
neighbors who cannot break their fast
together
I must adapt their religious and
cultural practices because of the crisis
we've all learned to adapt and we must
carry on doing soon after the pliner's
two sets out how we will get back to
work later this his comprehensive plan
will explain how we can get our economy
moving how we can get our children back
to school how we can travel to work more
safely and how we can make love in the
workplace safer but before we can ease
the existing restrictions we must ensure
the government's five tests are met but
the number of cases are falling the
death rates are declining the NHS has
what it needs and that measures are in
place to stop a second peak overwhelming
the NHS I'm particularly conscious that
those in the frontline of our public
services will need clear guidance on
safe working you'll need the right
personal protective equipment and
appropriate access to testing if we were
to make all the progress that we want in
the weeks ahead we're consulting with
employers and unions professionals and
public health experts to establish how
we can ensure that we have the safest
possible working environments and the
Prime Minister will be saying more later
this week on personal protective
equipment for key workers we are
increasing the spread of distribution
and supply from February 25th to May the
second we had delivered over 1.08
billion items of PPE across the health
and social care system within England
and tens of millions more have been
distributed by our colleagues in the
devolved administration's this overall
figure includes 149 million masks 173
million aprons 2 million gallons and 614
million gloves on the 2nd of May alone
we delivered an additional 20 million
items of
with inning but there is much more to do
and the work led by more Dayton to
improve domestic production of PPE is
vital to our efforts and on testing
thanks to the hard work of so many
across the NHS public health England our
pharmaceutical sector and our
universities we have tested over 200,000
key workers of their families allowing
those who don't have the virus to go
back to work and protecting those who do
we have now of course extended the
criteria for testing beyond key workers
anyone over 65 displaying symptoms and
anyone who gets to travel to get to work
and this week we will be piloting new
test track and trace procedures on the
Isle of Wight with a view to having them
in place more widely later this month
all of these steps will help us to get
more people back to work and help to
support the delivery of our public
services a lot the fact that you've done
so much to maintain the provision of
critical public services during this
crisis our teachers have worked
incredibly hard to perform in
educational support to millions and the
government has committed 100 million
pounds to boost remote learning for
those who need admits our newly launched
OBE National Academy is supplementing
all the work Kurama by schools and
teachers by providing 180 video lessons
each week and what particularly keen to
help vulnerable and disadvantaged
children carry on with their education
during the pandemic schools continue to
receive additional funding in the form
of the people premium for those peoples
who must deserve worth around 2 billion
annually and we've ordered laptops to
help disadvantaged young people who will
be sitting key exams next year we're
also providing laptops and tablets for
those children with social workers and
care leavers
to help them stay in touch with the
services they need keeping them safe and
supporting learning
and if disadvantaged secre school
people's and care leavers who are
preparing for exams do not have internet
access
we will provide free routers get them
connected while schools are closed over
the least of all these we were able to
ensure that more than 60% of schools
were open every day with places for both
vulnerable children and those of
critical workers and the free school
meal voucher scheme ensure that children
who needed it could continue to access
food despite school closures so far
15500 schools have placed orders for
vouchers of which over 35 million pounds
has been redeemed the latest available
data shows that around 49 thousand of
the children in attendance on April the
24th were classed by schools as
vulnerable more than double the figure
from a week earlier and while this is
going in the right direction we estimate
this still represents only around one in
10 of all children and young people
classified we want to see this figure go
up further and we're working with local
authorities schools and colleges to
provide improved support to vulnerable
young people all this additional support
of course takes time puts pressure on
existing stuff and costs money
that's why we've pledged an additional
1.6 billion pounds to councils are
crossing them to support their essential
frontline services including adult
social care this song takes the funding
given to councils to over 3.2 billion
pounds to help communities through this
crisis we've also deployed military
support to assist the public sector the
cough in support force mobilized by the
mo D is now 20 thousand strong today
over 3600 personnel are deployed in
support of 86 separate projects in which
military aid is being given to civil
authorities on a national level by
helping the ministry of housing
communities and local government the
Department of Health and Social Care and
also the NHS with planning and logistics
in England Scotland and Wales on the
ground they're helping to build and to
start for temporary Nightingale
hospitals and to operate with regional
testing centers for coronavirus of which
there are now 49 around the country and
also the mobile testing units that we
are rolling at to date there are 70
across the country 156 military planners
are embedded at grassroots level with
our existing local resilience forums
partnerships of emergency services local
authorities the NHS the Environment
Agency they're helping to coordinate and
to protect our vital local services and
supplies with the additional support of
senior rental officials in addition we
have local government for their
energetic work because since the end of
March
90% of rough sleepers known to councils
have been made an offer of accommodation
reassuring them about their safety and
the government will widely is also
working hard to support those who have
not been identified as shielded but are
still viable in the coming days we'll be
delivering our one-millionth parcel of
essential food to those at highest risk
across the country up to two hundred
thousand telephone calls a day are being
made to the shielded and councils are
helping to support them in other ways
including organising regular calls from
volunteers to those who are isolated in
our communities the support would
replace by many local organisations has
been inspirational as people step up to
help friends and neighbors and the
government has helped to mobilize
another important lifeline through the
NHS volunteers of responders program
over 600,000 people have had their ID
verified and are helping with the daily
areas that make such a significant
difference collecting shopping making
contact as a human voice on the end of a
telephone and transporting patients and
supplies for the NHS and of course we
are all working with supermarkets to
ensure that a greater number of online
delivery slots are made available to
those most in need in every one of these
areas the government and Westminster to
be working with ministers from the
Scottish Government the Welsh Government
and the Northern Ireland Executive this
has helped us to monitor and react to
the path of the virus across the nations
enabling us to intervene wherever people
at each of these daily press conferences
we've paid tribute to the compassion and
dedication of our key public sector
workers I recognize how much we all owe
to their stoicism and stare fossils
nurses doctors Porter's cleaners
paramedics pharmacists caring staff
prison men police officers teachers
social workers those preparing and
delivering food collecting our refuse
and administering our welfare system
they deserve our gratitude they deserve
our support they are in all our lines
they are the very best of us we owe them
so much and we in government will do
everything we can to support them during
the next phases of our pandemic response
I will now hand over to Professor powers
to take us through the latest
developments on the pending thank you
and good afternoon so if I may start by
reminding everybody the once again of
the five tests the government has set
for adjusting the lockdown so these are
shown here in the first slide the first
is that the NHS has sufficient capacity
to provide critical care and specialist
treatment right across the UK and of
course I'm delighted that the NHS to
date has been able to deal magnificently
with the surge in coronavirus patients
that we've seen but that needs to
continue and we need to be confident
that the same is true going forward into
the months ahead secondly that we see a
sustained and consistent fall in daily
deaths from coronavirus and as I will
show you later
that is indeed occurring now although we
need to make sure that it is sustained
thirdly that there is reliable data to
show that the rate of infection is
decreasing to manageable levels across
the board and although we are confident
that we have seen a decrease in the
spread of the virus in the community we
need to see the data and be sure the
data to know that that is indeed the
case and can be sustained fourthly that
the operational challenges some of which
you have just heard about including
testing and PPE are in hand are now in a
position that we'll be able to meet
future demand in the
months ahead and fifthly confidence that
any adjustments to the current social
distancing measures do not risk a second
peak of infection a transmission rate
that goes above our one in other words
one person infecting on average more
than one because that will lead to a
rise over time of the number of people
who infected and then increased pressure
on the NHS once again so those are the
five tests now as we've said many many
times the British public has responded
magnificently to the request of the
government to comply with the social
distancing measures and in the next
slide we give you some more data on the
evidence that that compliance has been
high and you can see here that in retail
and recreation in the workplace transit
stations representing public transport
but also in other areas that we have
seen a decline in the time people are
spending in those settings and I think
this overall as with other slides that
we have shown you over the past weeks
shows that the public continues to
respond to the requests to social to
keep social distancing measures to
comply to protect the NHS and to save
lives now in the next slide we show you
the number of positive tests of the
story of daily tests in the UK and
you've heard a little bit about that
again today and you will see that
testing capacity has ramped up very
quickly over the last week or so and we
are now at a very high level of testing
over a hundred thousand a little bit
we're dipping in the weekend but we
anticipate that that testing capacity
will continue to increase and it's a
very important component of our approach
going forward in the next slide you see
how that translates into new cases so
that tests positive cases and again you
see an increase in
recent days and I think that reflects
that we are now texting in more settings
we're allowing we're able to let more
people come forward for testing because
testing capacity is ramped up but the
numbers have not increased dramatically
and I think that means even with more
testing it's evidence that the rate of
infection in in community is declining
in the next slide you will see how that
translates into people in hospital with
kovat 19:00 and as i've said many times
this is a mild disease that the vast
majority of people but unfortunately for
some hospital admission is required and
you can see that the peak of hospital
admissions has now passed particularly
in London where we saw the steepest rise
and we have now have started to see the
steepest fall and since the middle of
April we have begun to see a decline in
the overall number of people in hospital
and that again is evidence the
transmission rate of the virus in the
community is falling and that is
translating into fewer people being
admitted into hospital and then the next
slide that shows again how this
translates into the usage of critical
care beds so these are our sickest
patients again a small minority but
nevertheless a very important group of
people that have to receive care in
intensive therapy units and you can see
once again as a proportion this has been
declining since the middle of April and
indeed if we look to the absolute
numbers you would see a decline in
absolute numbers - so again evidence
that we are seeing the benefits of
complying with social distancing
measures and the reduction in
transmission of the virus in the
community is beginning to have an effect
on fewer people in critical care and
then finally the last two slides
unfortunately represent those who have
died of course there are stories behind
every single death and our heart goes
out to those loved ones who suffer the
loss of a relative or a friend but you
can see that on a seven-day rolling
average on these figures provided by
public health England profit of Health
and
raishin that the trend now is downwards
so it does appear that we are past the
peak of death too and we are beginning
to see a decline in the number of deaths
which of course it's good news and again
represents the benefits of complying
with social distancing and then in the
final slide as we've shown before an
international comparison now reporting a
UK data in all settings remember
previously in these charts are showing
that we were reporting for some time
deaths in hospitals this is now all
settings and again the usual caveats
with this that different countries
measure this differently the the measure
that I think we all recognize will be
the key measure is excess deaths for all
mortality because that will take it into
account the overall effect of the
pandemic but it will be some time before
that sort of comparison can be done
between countries thank you thank you
very much Steve thank you now turn now
to questions and I believe that we have
two questions from members of the public
which have been submitted
what lessons have you learned to prepare
are helping to care systems for the
expected future waves of the virus and
how you're ensuring that we have
adequate supplies of working ventilators
and PPE for those expected future waves
now
well that mission was from Chris and
London what lessons have we learned for
future waves of the virus
how will we ensure that we have enough
PPE and ventilators in the future we're
less learning lessons all the time as
indeed the world is this is a a new
virus and scientists are working
internationally to determine what the
best means is of dealing with it that's
why we are piloting treatments which
could prevent the virus once people have
been infected becoming more dangerous
for them it's also while we're working
internationally to seek to skewer
vaccine of course we expect that may be
some time away a lot of the things that
we have learned is how to improve our
testing capacity we also now have
increased domestic ventilator production
and location is increasing domestic PPE
production as well and I think the
lessons that we're learning in the UK
are similar to the lessons that other
countries are learning as well see yes
well as you've heard the chief medical
officer say at this podium going forward
the intention will be to keep the
transmission rate the r-value below one
that is one of the five tests sent by
the government for adjusting the lot
done as I mentioned a few minutes ago
and if we can do that successfully
then we should protect ourselves against
future waves of the virus but having
said that nothing is ever certain and
it's absolutely the case that we need to
go forward putting in place the measures
within the NHS to ensure that if for
whatever reason we do see future waves
that we can cope with this and I think
the lesson that I've learned is that the
NHS is able to behave incredibly
flexibly incredibly agile and surge its
capacity at very short notice if you go
back only a month or two when we were at
the start of this
the NHS was planning on how we could
manage an increase in the number of
cases of people with kovat 19 and at
that time remember we were seeing health
systems in other parts of the world
becoming overwhelmed so you will
remember the pictures from Wuhan in
China at the very start of this in
January you will remember the images we
saw from northern Italy when that help
system became became overwhelmed the
patients had to be flown to other
countries and you will remember seeing
images in closer countries France of
patients having to be moved out of major
urban centers such as Paris and so what
I learned is that the NHS and the great
staff of the NHS when given that
challenge can very very rapidly put in
place the extra capacity that is
required and and they have done that
magnificently and at no point during the
surge of cases in April was the NHS in a
position where it was not able to give
the treatment out to patients with kovat
19:00 that they needed that is the great
testament to - - how well the NHS has
been able to cope and I think then the
lesson going forward is one that we can
do that but - we need to keep back
capacity in place but we need to keep it
in place at the same time standing up
all the other services that the NHS is a
is providing they're the ones we've
always provided the emergency services
but some of the services that we've had
to stand down during April so elective
surgery for instance so my lesson is
that the NHS is incredibly flexible it
can respond to this challenge and it
will respond to the challenge going
forward into the months ahead submitted
Rebecca from Scotland asks we see daily
charts showing the quantifiable
scientific effects of lata how are you
taking into account the unquantifiable
non-scientific social and emotional
effects when considering the balance
between benefit and damage caused by
lockdown well Rebecca we're seeking all
the time to make sure that we balance
the need to protect life TEKT the NHS
with an acknowledgement you're right
that lockdown will have an impact on the
mental and emotional well-being of so
many of our citizens and of course by
suppressing
activity it also means that the the well
for country needs an order to ensure
that we are my quality public services
is affected as well but the five tests
that have been laid down and witchetty
reminders of earlier are a very good way
of making sure that we can make an
appropriate judgment because the worst
thing to do would be to prematurely
relax the current measures to see a
second spark which won't risk
overwhelming the NHS and what would
compel us to introduce lockdown measures
all over again that would be the most
dangerous of course I think for us to
take ste yes so as a doctor I am very
aware that the measures that we have at
has to ask people to comply with the
stay at home the avoid social cat
contact can have detrimental effects in
terms of in terms of health but also
emotional and social effects as you as
you have asked in your question and and
we are very keen as though all my
clinical and scientific colleagues to
make sure that as soon as we possibly
can
we are able to give advice that allows
those measures to be to be relaxed as
you have heard a number of times the
harm that might be done in terms of
health as a direct effect of the virus
debt due to the virus has to be balanced
off over time against the harm that is
done around lockdown and it's not easy
that those are two things that it's not
easy to reconcile but I can say that we
are very very aware of the effects that
lockdown has both socially emotionally
and on health and that's why plotting a
way ahead that allows overtime those
restrictions to be lifted while at the
same time keeping the transmission rate
low in the community is absolutely the
goal that we are working towards thank
you thank you we'll turn now to
questions from representatives of news
organizations and the first is from
Chris Mason of the BBC Chris hello good
afternoon to you at both Mr Gove it's
the lockdown measures beginning to ease
how is the government going to persuade
people but it is safe to be out and
about more and professor Paris how
confident are you in the models that
predict what in
a particular change in the rules might
actually have well thank you Chris you
were absolutely right Lee the the
British public have shown amazing
stoicism and understanding of the need
for the lockdown measures and quite
rightly wants to ensure that if and when
they are eased that they're eased a way
that makes sure that the British people
sacrifice has been worthwhile and that
we continue to operate in a way which
means the public health comes first and
that's why it's so important that we
consult with employers and with trade
unions in order to make sure that people
understand the guidance about working
safely it's also important that we make
clear that any approach we take is
staged but we're not as the First
Minister of Scotland said flicking a
switch again from one situation back to
the old normal our phased approach is
one which allows us to monitor the
impact that those changes are having on
public health and if necessary in a
specific and localised way that means
that we can pause or even reintroduce
those restrictions that might be
required in order to deal with localised
outbreaks of the disease and of course
it's also important that we make sure
that people have the as well as the
right guidance and the right safe
working environment the right personal
protective equipment as well and that
will vary from setting to setting the
type of PPE that you will need if you're
operating in intensive care is different
from the type of PPE that you might
require in another public sector setting
and then the the final thing is map
Hancock's amazing success and increasing
testing means that people have greater
confidence along with the development of
the test track and a trace approach
that's being piloted in the Isle of
Wight that we will be able to make sure
the people who are suffering from the
virus can be they and their contacts can
be encouraged to stay at home so that we
can limit the potential of any outbreak
yeah so on the modeling I think Chris
always the first point to make is that
modeling is just that it is a process of
taking a set of assumptions a set of
knowns and predicting what will happen
in the future and the reality will
always
to be different fraud from the model it
will not be exactly replicate the model
and sometimes some of the assumptions
you can't be certain about and and there
are some unknowns when you model so
having said that right at the start of
this a reasonable worst-case scenario
model was produced by the government or
for the government which predicted what
would happen if no measures were taken
to submit to prevent or to mitigate or
to reduce the level of transmission in
the community of course no country has
actually stood aside and and not put in
place some form of social distancing
measures so so we will not you know we
won't know what that would have been
against that model because everybody has
put in a set of measures that has made
but that that didn't happen and once the
lockdown measures were in place and
other other models were produced that
took into account the predicted
compliance of the public with those
lockdown measures and as I've said
you've heard before the brief public
have been really excellent at complying
with those and in fact what we have seen
certainly in the NHS in terms of the
predictions those sorts of model and the
models come from a variety of academic
groups working together as predicted in
terms of bad numbers of aid usage has
actually the reality has actually
followed the shape of those predictions
it never follows it perfectly in
absolute numbers but it's forwarded
pretty much in the shape of what we've
seen so that does give me some
confidence that going forward that
models are a reasonable way of
predicting what we might see and they do
predict that over the next month or so
we will continue to see a decline in the
number of patients in hospital with
coded 19 the number of people in
critical care and indeed the number of
that and of course that is what we are
seeing in in reality clearly we will
need to do more modeling
clearly it's important that various
academic groups feed into those models
that is right and proper that is what's
age and other and the modelling groups
do they will never be an absolute
perfect prediction of reality
but I have confidence that going forward
they will give us a very good guide what
we what we are likely to see thank you
very much it was that ingress is there
anything you wanted to follow up on
where you want it just further
elucidation a very quick follow up with
you mr. go we've got very used to the
that the mantra passes across there the
lectern short you're stood behind and
can we expect to come in the next face
to mirror what could be a more subtle
and more nuanced set of rules well I
think I think you're right that the
message has been taken to the heart of
the British people what we need to do I
think is just to make sure that they on
the ground advice that we give is
sufficiently reassuring I think it's
about making sure that people feel that
the pointers that we're giving about how
our place can be safe
a sensible reliable supported by
employers and trade unions I think
myself that's the most important um I'll
turn that to Dan Huot of ITV first of
all on the NHS contact tracing has been
trialed in the Isle of Wight and this
week even you need fifty to sixty
percent of the entire population and to
download this app once it's up and
running
how crucial how central would be to the
government policy of and suppressing the
virus and how but will it dictate going
forward and the measures new put in
place or lift in terms of the lockdown
and secondly on testing between the
number of fall to send six thousand or
so and how do you account for that sharp
fall and in just 24 hours and how
concerned are you by the fall of almost
thirty thousand tests well thank you
well thank you Dan um on the first you
absolutely right that when it comes to
contact tracing the more people who
download the app that's been developed
by the NHS the better there are some
eighty thousand households on the Isle
of Wight and obviously we'd like to see
more than half a pestles if we can sign
up to the app but it's striking and it
refers back obviously to points to Chris
Mason mate how about the exposure people
have been throughout this crisis and
then knowing that this is a contra
all of us can make to helping to keep
our neighbors and our communities safer
I think is a very very powerful
incentive and the leader of the Alawite
cancelling the otherwise MPD excellent
Bob Seeley have both said that they
believe that it's in the interests of
the island and of the country that as
many people as possible sign up to the
app on the point about testing it is the
case that you might expect over a
weekend to clear veracity with fewer
people going to work that you might have
a dip in the amount of testing that that
might occur at that time but again I
don't think it in any way two tracks
from the amazing achievement of the NHS
and of others and so significantly
increasing the amount of tests that are
available
Basti yes so on the app I think you're
absolutely right it is one component or
the number it's likely to be one
component of a number of measures that
will be needed I would think it's
unlikely that on its own it is going to
be the single measure or the single
intervention that will ensure that the
virus is is always under control there
will need to be contact tracing in the
way we've always done contact tracing so
people following leads as to who you've
contacted that's exactly why probably
health England recruit recruiting many
thousands of people to help with contact
tracing
and it will need to set aside other
measures that we have become used to
such as if you are symptomatic and if
you you have the virus and if you test
positive you will need to stay at home
for a period so so it is one component
the more people who download it and use
it the likely the bigger contribution it
will make but it will not I doubt either
single contribution and of course
texting it will help us to understand
before it is deployed exactly what that
contribution is likely to be so the
texting in the Isle of Wight is a very
important phase in understanding how the
app is going to be used and exactly what
the contribution will be thanks then did
you want to come back on anything
they're only on the app whatever do you
have maybe from other countries of the
research have done so far suggests this
could actually work because clearly it's
a it's a it's very new so I take I've
got the sense from
how's that you not only reliant on this
well again Press Pass I'm blind at work
but it is it's one arrow in the quiver
but it is the case of other countries
Germany and France are developing apps
as well and we want to make sure that
they're interoperable the fact that
other developed nations and our European
friends and partners are going down this
route I think only underlines how wise
NHS X was to invest in and to lead on
this technology yes other countries are
developing or using apps not not
everybody has deployed one so you're
absolutely right there will be
international learning as we go forward
as to when these apps are deployed in
some of the Far Eastern countries they
have been used successfully so there is
evidence that they they can be used as
part of a series of measures but I think
even in those countries such as
Singapore and other countries again it
is a suite of measures it is not a
single measure so we will we will learn
some of that as we test then as we roll
it out and and I think the other
important point to make is that this is
this will never be about a single set of
measures that you freeze and then don't
change over time I think measures will
always need to be reviewed and adjusted
based on what the infection is doing and
what the reality of the situation is but
the app will be an important component
of that going forward do you agree with
your transport secretary testing meeting
place sooner many lives could have been
saved and Mr Gove you keep telling us
you're on top of the PPE issue once
again today but a BMA report out today
said that half of doctors had the source
their own PPE because the government
failed to do so what would you say to
the families of frontline NHS workers
who've died without me providing with a
proper protective equipment that they
need I will thank you well thank you and
good I'm on the first point about Sir
about testing again I think there will
be a time when we've got this virus
under control when we can ask ourselves
some deep and probing questions about
lessons that we can learn as a country
from how we handled this virus in its
early stages I would just say that the
amazing achievement of Matt Hancock Jim
Bethel our NHS and others in ensuring
that we can increase the number of tests
it has been I think a an example of what
the public sector and the private sector
working together under very strong
political leadership can achieve but of
course we will have an opportunity in
due course look back and reflect and
consider what it is that we've got right
and what it is that we got wrong
undoubtedly this doesn't like all
government sort of make mistakes but it
will be impossible to determine exactly
which where the areas of greatest
concern until sometime in the future
when we have all the information that we
need I'm on PPE I would never say that
we were on top I would always say that
we're doing everything that we can and
it's naturally of concern to any of us
if people on the front line don't have
the right personal protective equipment
but it is the case as you'll be aware
that the BMA does an excellent job
principally but not exclusively in
representing people on in primary care
GPS and so on and it has been the case
in the past but for those in general
practice that they will have been
sourcing quite a lot of their own
equipment themselves in any case but of
course we want to make sure that we do
everything at an NHS level and beyond to
support everyone who does have the right
personal protective equipment and again
there will be an opportunity in due
course to the back and to see what we've
got wrong and what we haven't got right
when it comes to making sure that
frontline workers get everything that
they need in the meantime though all our
focus is on making sure that we can do
as well as possible in supporting people
we're putting everything on the line to
look after us so you may want to Foley
failings over PPE and what do you say to
their families whose love lost their
loved ones frontline NHS workers well
every every death is a and we want to
make sure that we do everything that we
can to support those who are on the
frontline in the NHS and the
as I say be a moment when we can reflect
on what might have been done better in
the meantime what we must do is to make
sure as a little Dayton is doing as the
Department of Health is doing as every
arm of government is doing but we use
all of the tools at our disposal to
increase production of the Gaia's aprons
those vices and other equipment the
people on the front line eat of course
it is important to recognize him I know
you do but the range of personal
protective equipment that might be
needed in in one setting will be
different from from another but Steve
you may want to say well well on PPE
obviously as a doctor who worked on the
front line for many many years I've said
before and I'll say again I know how
critical it is that PP is provided to my
colleagues my friends on the front line
I know that that has been a challenge
I know government has been working very
very hard I know that it's an
international market that is under
significant stress as every country
tries to purchase PPE a couple of weeks
ago I know I would concerned about guns
the position on guns actually has
improved a bit over the last couple of
weeks so depending upon the item of PPE
things will improve over time but but it
is a challenge for exactly the reasons
that we've said but it is absolutely
critical as you say that government
stays on top of that that challenge and
PPE is provided to frontline staff yes
and what it is I mean it doesn't take
away from the responsibility of any of
us in government but it is a a global
challenge and Channel 4 News viewers and
others will have seen some of the
protests and other countries in France
and Germany as doctors there have
complained about the lack of PPE as I
say that doesn't take away for a second
from our responsibility to do even
better but it does mean I think that
people recognize that this is a global
challenge
Chris hood of the Telegraph stated one
way systems in stations and stagger
start the working day when will daily
life returns what we knew before the
pandemic struck how many years might it
take that we start quickly miss a better
Paris Nightingale hospitals are empty
with
an error or to be filled the second way
couple quick ones but what is the
viruses are value today what was the
exact date last week and what have you
got time when UK passed through the P
and that's four very important questions
miss on on the on the first one about
when can we return to normal I think
people have used the phrasing what are
they thought to imply is that we can
begin we hope as you point out as the a
as the old figure comes down to ease
some of the restrictions but we we have
to do so in a cautious fashion and the
trampled sector was right to say that we
can begin to see perhaps more people use
public transport provided they are
helped to to stagger or to control the
times when they use public transport and
the way that people have already
adjusted to how they might use
supermarkets and food shops and so on
ultimately unless and until we have a
vaccine then I suspect that we're going
to have to live with some degree of
constraint because of the nature of the
of the virus but we obviously want to
wherever possible and consistent with
our measures on Public Health restore
people's lives to as close to normal as
possible but a you asked three detailed
technical questions which which Steve um
may be able to answer but they're so
precise I think that they may elude any
capacity for any scientist or precisely
well I'll give it a go so on the first
on how long will the new normal need to
last as you might expect that an answer
that none of us can give at the moment
if I remind you in everybody but this is
a virus that at the end of last year was
not known I was had not been in the
human population and therefore the
population around the world was not
immune to it so we're only really four
months into any knowledge at all about
this virus and it's really difficult to
know how this is going to play out in
the months and years ahead but a few
things I think I can be so
but firstly is that the scientific
response of this viruses probably be the
greatest to any new virus the fact that
it was sequence this genetic sequence
was known within weeks of it being
identified as mean that the science can
accelerate very quickly including the
ability to generate produced vaccines
and start to test them and also of
course to start to use drugs and to
understand which drugs it is likely will
bind to either the virus or or part of
the body's machinery that the virus
itself affects so that means that we can
proceed with a with a pace that's
probably the lab certain has not been
the case in other any other previous
pandemic so that gives us hope that we
might get to a solution whether it's a
vaccine or indeed whether it's drugs
sooner that we might have hope ten
twenty years ago but it's impossible to
say when that will be but it's certainly
true to say that we will need to adapt
to a new normal until we get to that
point on the second question which was
what were the nightingales built-in
error absolutely a 100 percent not and
if you remember I was talking a little
bit earlier in response to another
question that if you wind the clock back
a month or two we were looking at an
increase in the number of cases
infections in the UK we watching images
from around the world of health systems
that were overwhelmed and we had not put
in place a we were about to put in place
a series of social distancing measures
not absolutely knowing how the public
would respond to that and it would have
been foolish to have not planned for
extra capacity within the NHS we did
that in a number of ways including the
nightingales the fact that we have not
needed to use all that capacity is
actually good news because it means that
the public have complied with the social
distancing measures they have started to
flatten that curve and we've seen fewer
admissions and ultimately fewer this you
might have seen if we if this virus had
just been left to spread
unchecked and the very early worst case
scenario is that as I said no country
has let play out would have meant many
many many deaths and an awful lot of
pressure on health services so I think
you would be a hundred a thousand times
more critical if the NHS had not put in
that extra capacity and had become
overwhelmed you would be quite rightly
asking as why we had not gone every mile
that we could possibly go to put in that
extra capacity so the NA the
nightingales were not built in error and
we may still need them we are not
through this yet
and although government policy and the
scientific advice is to try and ensure
that the virus does not start to spread
widely again we we can never absolutely
be certain and therefore for the months
ahead we need to maintain that extra
capacity until we have more certainty
and then thirdly on when was the peak so
I think that's a question that that
can't really be precisely answered as
you've heard because firstly it's been a
series of Peaks has been peaks and dad
speaks in hospital admissions and Peaks
have occurred at different times during
around the country because different
regions of the country have been in
different stages but as you saw from the
slides presented at the start
most of the measures that we are looking
at started to reduce from around the
middle of April so I think broadly we
saw that plateauing of a variety of
measures around the middle of April
thanks very much thank you
and we'll turn now to see in a row so
spending balance has said that a chief
medical officer that they believe the
r-value is is around 0.7 we are
measuring that directly at the moment
through the work of the Office for
National Statistics I think that's being
measured by randomly testing people in
the community once that data is
has been presented to us once that data
is available I think it will be it will
be better to give a more precise figure
but I think as Patrick also explained I
think it's really impossible to come
with an absolute single precise number
because throughout the country in
different settings it will be slightly
different so I think you will always see
a range but with better data that range
will Mary thank you very much Rodgers
from so mr. can you tell us how many
risk assess prisoners in total and how
many pregnant prisoners have now been
released and professor powers rates of
self-harm in English and Welsh prisons
were up 14 percent last year visits
cancelled at the moment are you
concerned about the well-being of people
in cells 23 hours a day
oh thank you Sienna thank you um with
respect to the early release of
prisoners thee the Lord Chancellor and
his team developed a package of which
the early release of business was just
one of March in order to make sure that
we could restrict the spread of the
virus within the present state and the
reason for that was to reduce the number
of cases from RIS mistake which would be
in our NHS so our principal aim as
always was to protect the NHS and there
were a number of changes that the Lord
Chancellor made to the prison system in
order to increase capacity and including
cohorting with in particular prisons and
restrictions on the transfer of
prisoners but what more of it as you
what rather point out was the ability in
specific circumstances to release on
prisoners early and a set of tests were
applied it needed to be the case that
their first offense their index offense
was over particular kinds of did not
pose a risk to the public and it needed
to be the case that they were close to
the time when they would have been
released anyway and as you quite rightly
point out the business at the front of
the queue um were those pregnant women
who found themselves in prison I know
that there were at least 33 people who
had been released I think the number is
higher than
now but after this press conference I'll
of course talk to the Ministry of
Justice make sure that you have the
accurate figures but as I say I think it
was around 33 who had been released this
time last week I think those would be
confirmed figures but we will get the
absolutely accurate figures for you I
don't hand over T yes on prison health
in general so I absolutely believe that
we should always be doing as much as we
possibly can to support prison health
fact about this time last year I spent a
morning in a prison in the north of
England looking at prison health
services and I was incredibly impressed
with the dedication of the staff within
the prison but also staff and general
practitioners coming in from outside to
provide support and clearly at a time of
crisis a time of emergency such as
coronavirus it's really important that
we we place an additional focus on
ensuring the prison health is responding
at the same time it's important to
ensure that we maintain safety and we we
reduce the chance of outbreaks and and
spread of kovat but that's that's a very
important balance and it mirrors the
balance in in one sense in the community
that was the subject of one of the
previous questions as to how you balance
between the sort of measures you need to
might need to put in place to stop
spread of the virus
varices ensuring that the potential
downsides of that are adequately managed
as well so yes I do think it's
incredibly important that we do that
thank you very much is there any
particular yes please and I just wanted
to ask what are you doing right now to
prepare for the spike in prison
population that's expected when
restrictions are lifted and normal core
activities get going again well you are
right that at the moment from our courts
into our prisons has been lower and
that's helped us to manage the situation
in prison and where during the course of
this week we'll be looking in the
ministry with implementation group which
I chair at both how we can make sure
that there are more criminal cases which
are appropriately heard and also how we
can
prism estate can manage one part of that
is making sure that we have access to
additional facilities and I think it's
the case that a formal secure training
center for young offenders in Medway has
been made available to the prison state
but it's also the case of business state
is working with the MiG and others to
make sure that there are sufficient
spaces as and when as you quite rightly
point out more criminal cases on her um
I'll turn now to off my mercy from other
Muslim news hi I'd like to I understand
that what NHS England and public health
England have got an inquiry into the
disproportionate impact on the commad 19
on the AME communities I'd like to know
what are the terms of reference for this
inquiry and the names of the members of
this inquiry and secondly why is it that
whenever of questions are asked
regarding this impact of probably
nineteen more miss proportionately only
via any communities the answer we always
get is to do with biological reasons we
might talk about because of the hype
preponderance of diabetes heart
conditions and so on don't you see there
are most structural issues like racism
and discrimination that it's in the
community and as well as in the national
health well I think there's a very
powerful questions in charge it up it um
the the work that's going on to look at
the what appears to be a significant
additional number of deaths amongst the
pame population is being conducted by a
variety of people in the NHS public
health England
um and of course for being as supported
by Sir Trevor Phillips and and others in
looking at those figures and it is the
case of course that you need to look at
these things as you fully appreciate in
the round it may be the case that
amongst some minority populations there
is
to indicate with the reference of
diabetes are a greater prevalence of
comorbidities that may be affected but
it may also be the fact so that as we
know inequality can contribute to public
health outcomes and it may be that we
need to take a step back and look more
broadly at some of the inequalities that
exist within our society but I certainly
wouldn't want to prejudge that question
and certainly I know that Steve knows
far more about these questions than I do
from a scientific yes so it's an
incredibly important question or set of
questions so the investigation is being
undertaken by public health England we
at NHS England don't have the core
experience or the the experts in the
particular work areas that need to look
at this that is an area where public
health England has the expertise we will
of course support probably health
England but the chief medical officer is
a public health England to look at that
I haven't got a full list of the names
of people who will be involved in that
but I'm sure that that will be available
as you have said it is possible that
some of the underlying conditions that
are associated or a higher prevalence in
ethnic groups might be important because
they are also fact risk factors that
mean it's more likely to either get the
virus or to suffer the complications but
as you quite rightly say that might not
be the only reason and it's really
important that the public health England
and colleagues who were working on this
go in with an open mind and look at all
the possible causes biological causes
may well be one part but it's important
that it's looked at in the round I
absolutely agree with you there thank
you very much did you want to follow up
yeah you mentioned Trevor Phillips this
two issues here one is he recently said
that the death phase from the Pakistani
and Bangladeshi communities was not
significantly higher than the general
population however all the reports that
are aver shows that the Pakistani
Bangladeshi images are actually
I get a very much a high rate of deaths
than the general population and the
reason that he gave which is very
surprising is that because they are
doing ritual ablutions um what kind of a
person that you are I'm employing that
kind of firm conclusion well I'm not
aware of those comments but I do know
that trophy flips as chair of the
equalities and human rights commission
was always someone who was driven by the
data and public health England would do
nothing else other than follow the data
in coming to appropriate conclusions and
of course we we do need to look at as we
discussed earlier and as Steve mentioned
Gentry some biological factors but also
as as your question implied also perhaps
some city economical structural factors
which may lead to inequality and -
equality may have been as a result of
discrimination but we need to look at
all these things fortunately I think
anyone who's prepared to give their time
who is a distinguished public servant
like Trevor Phillips to help us in this
endeavor is someone who support we want
so thank you very much that's the end of
this press conference and I look forward
to one of my colleagues joining you
perdy Amaro